LXXVII




I PRESS PAINFULLY THROUGH FIRE AND RUBBLE AND screams against a flow of bloodied, glassy-eyed Octavii so terrified that they barely even notice my growling alupi as we pass. Another explosion to my left causes me to shield my face as it shatters the warehouse there, massive stone chunks of façade landing dangerously close to Diago and me. More Will shells. Imbued, hollowed-out stone containers filled with an explosive mixture developed a hundred years ago by the Sytrecian University. Simply transported through the air by Will as far as desired, and then dropped. The smashing of the container releases the Will back to the imbuer, and the explosion kills anyone nearby.

A weapon not used in open conflict, to the best of my knowledge, since Birthright was established fifty years ago. They are brutal and indiscriminate and effective.

Especially for an enemy who is trying to draw attention.

The way ahead provides a clear view down to the burning harbour. The dark shadows of noiseless ships stream through the darkness, smaller silhouettes leaping off their decks and sprinting up wharves. Hundreds of them. Many will be Septimii, surely; I doubt Redivius will have committed too many Sextii to his distraction.

Still. The fighting in the streets is about to get bloody. A fifth of Laurentius’s legion has been secreted not far from the docks; the plan is to allow the initial response to appear feeble, ensure that Redivius believes his attack to be a surprise and that we will be rushing reinforcements here. And then—as his diversionary forces push farther in—to surround and crush them.

A plan which, it seems, also included not warning the men and women working through the late hours, loading and unloading goods in the harbour. I see a man walk past with an absent stare. Calm, almost distracted. His arm ends in a bleeding, blistered stump.

I don’t stop. There’s nothing I can do for him, for any of them. I check my sense of the armband I imbued for Baine and angle down a nearby alley, flinching again at another scream of torn masonry behind me. Eidhin is farther to the east. The edge of the assault, I think.

I hear the roars of attackers and the cries of those they cut down, but I slink along back ways, keeping to the shadows; Diago being here will help, but if I come up against a group of Sextii—or honestly, in my current condition, even just a couple—then I will be in trouble.

I push more Will into my legs. My fury has hardened into something colder now but I still use it, more than anything else, to embrace their aching discomfort. I’m getting better at adjusting the scaffolding that allows me to walk, more agile and moving with less thought. Kadmos’s tea continues to do its work and should until past dawn, numbing the grinding, digging pain of edged metal and broken bone.

The next half hour passes in a blur. Walking, jogging, hiding, fighting. The air buzzing with near-invisible projectiles imbued with Will, my only advantage that if I concentrate fiercely, I can sense them as tiny pulses in my head before they get too close.

At one point I see Octavii fleeing a half dozen Sextii and force myself to do nothing, watching from the shadows as they are cut down. Heart pounding. Drenched in sweat that feels icy against the night air. Silently watching the slaughter, and cursing myself for cowardice, and waiting until Redivius’s legionnaires have moved on before doing so myself.

Twice, I am forced to fight. Once to take down a single crazed Sextus who seems to have run far ahead of his comrades. Bloodlust lights his eyes, a fierce grin on his face as he chases terrified Octavii past the darkened alley where I hide. I almost let him go too, but can’t. My armour disintegrates into a cloud of spinning metal blades that I send at his back. His dying screams haunt me as I stumble on, ignoring the grateful shouts of the men and women I leave in my wake.

The second time, it is a dozen Septimii who sprint around a corner before I can conceal myself. They see me alone but approach smartly, cautiously, so that when my blades arrow toward them they are able to mostly absorb the attack, the triangles embedding in the wood of their shield wall.

It’s a good tactic; usually stone chips upon impact and the imbuing is lost. It’s especially true for Praetorians’ razors.

Unfortunately for them, metal has no such issues.

The Septimii realise they’re outmatched too late, their fear only exacerbated as Diago crashes into their line, snarling and knocking two of them over from the sheer force of his attack. One man’s throat is ripped clean out and as another goes to thrust his blade into my alupi’s side, I take him in the neck with a spinning shard. The remaining Septimii break, retreating. Diago kills another. I finish the rest.

It’s over in less than a minute. No time to consider. Bodies strewn. Blood coats the triangles as I bring them back to my chest. Bile in my stomach, but it was them or me.

I end the groans of the last surviving man, and press on.



I SEE SEVERAL MORE SKIRMISHES OVER THE NEXT FIFteen minutes. Sharp, visceral sketches of violence and panic and desperation painted a fiery red, each one a vital delay in getting to my friend as I’m forced to skirt them. The horror of what I’m seeing, the ache of my legs, the agony of what happened to Aequa only a few hours ago—it all recedes into a dull, thumping constant, an oddly detached concern when compared to the need to stay alive and find Eidhin.

Some distant part of me recognises that the toll of it all will be heavy, when I am finally forced to confront it. But right now I keep forcing it back, and focus on the beacon of Will in my mind that draws closer, and closer, until finally it is only one street over.

Quieter, here. Fewer Octavii working, less resistance. Whether through design or fortune, Eidhin has chosen well.

I hug the shadows as voices drift to me. Low and urgent. I peer around a corner to see a half dozen men swiftly walking up the street.

My friend is with them. Marching grimly, black eyes scanning the surrounding buildings for any sign of danger.

I focus on the imbuing of his armband, and tug it toward me. He makes no outward sign of there being anything wrong, but after a few seconds he signals to the man next to him. “We should check these buildings are clear.”

“We need to hurry,” argues another immediately.

A fleeting discussion and then Eidhin is agreeing to stay with one other of his group, while the remaining four press on. Eidhin gestures his comrade to the other side of the street, then strides for my position. Eyes narrowed as he peers into the shadows.

When he sees me, he stops short. Touches the silver around his arm in confusion.

Shakes his head in disgust, then strides forward and embraces me in a crushing hug.

It’s a simple, heartfelt act, and suddenly the emotion of tonight, everything I’ve seen and been through, sweeps back and threatens to overwhelm the cold, furious determination that’s been driving me. Just for a second. I grip him back and swallow the lump in my throat. Shove it all back down. No time for grief. Not yet.

“You should not be here.” He growls it as he parts and pushes me back roughly, examining me with a frown. Ruffles the fur on Diago’s head absently as the alupi nudges him affectionately at the waist. “We need to get you to safety. They will know you are Catenicus and if they see you—”

“We need to get you to safety. Laurentius knows the plan, Eidhin. He knows this is a diversion. You’re walking into an ambush.”

He frowns. “Diversion?”

“Yes.” My turn to frown. “Your attack. The feint here, and then the real attack on the Forum …” My heart sinks. “No?”

“No.” He rubs his face. “Many are expected to die here, but we are just the auxiliaries. The first wave.” He leans forward. Urgent. “Redivius has a hundred more ships coming and they are filled with his legionnaires. We are only here to clear the shore defences. Hold back reinforcements long enough to ensure his main force lands safely.”

The same defences that Baine convinced me to reduce. I groan softly to myself, though I’m already wrung out enough that it hits more as frustration at the disaster than the gut-punch of it. “What about the Transvect?”

“They are going to drop Will shells from it. Thousands of them. After more of Redivius’s legion disembark here.”

Vek. Vek. “How long do we have?”

“Not long.”

I run my hands through my hair. Maybe Eidhin’s been lied to; it wouldn’t be the first time a general didn’t tell his troops the whole story. But if my friend is right …

I push it aside. Remember why I’m here, what I hope to do, and fill my tone with urgency. “It doesn’t matter. Not now. Come with me. I know Redivius is forcing you to fight, but I can get you out. You don’t have to give up your life for him.”

“It was never for him.” Apologetic and unswayed. “It is for my Septimii.”

“I know.”

He frowns. Anger in his eyes. “And you still ask? Would you do any different?”

“Would you not ask?” I reply quietly.

He’s silent at that. Grunts, then twists to peer over his shoulder. “We do not have long, Vis. Of course I do not wish to fight, but I will not hide so that others may die in my place. And I will not abandon my people. I hope you will believe me when I tell you that there is no choice.” He gazes at me ruefully. A gentle expression. “Will you stand in my way?”

I consider him. An ache in my chest as I shake my head slowly. “But there is a choice, Eidhin. It will be days before Redivius thinks you’ve defected. Time enough.” I put all my belief into the sentence. “We can rescue your people.”

“The two of us alone? We would not get within a thousand feet of them. No, Vis. I will not delay my death so that you can join me in it.”

I don’t pursue it. Exactly the reasoning I expected. “They won’t be free if you die. Your Septimii. Redivius will just force them to serve the next man, and the next, until finally they are tethered to one who lacks the honour that you have. Which I promise you, will not take long at all.”

A flicker in his eyes, at that. He knows the truth of it.

“You all believe in ddram cyfraith,” I press. Intent. It’s hard, conveying the right emotion. Everything’s so taut in my head and though I want him to see how desperately I need him to listen, some part of me has to stay tight and cold and in control. Otherwise, I may yet break. Break and not be able to recover. “What would they say, Eidhin? Which is the better sacrifice? Their deaths for your freedom, or your death for their situation to become worse?”

There’s a twitch this time, and I see the argument hits home. Eidhin wavers.

Then he frowns. Touches the armband again. “How did you come to imbue this?” he asks suddenly.

I close my eyes. I could lie. It would be easier.

“Your father.”

“My father.” He spits it. Anger erasing whatever persuasion he had begun to feel. “Of course he said that. He told you this was a diversion, too, did he not? Used you? You should know how I feel about—”

“Of course I do. But just because he lied about the one, makes the other no less true.”

“It does, Vis! The man does nothing but manipulate.” He issues a stream of Cymrian invective. “I am sorry. Truly. But I must go before someone comes looking for me.” He wraps me in another embrace. Lingers in it, just for a moment. This one is to say farewell.

Then he is walking away.

“Eidhin.”

He pauses.

“I do understand.” Heart thudding. Sick to my stomach, even through everything else. I knew it would come to this, and perhaps it’s the wrong decision. Perhaps it won’t make a difference. But if I don’t try, I’ll never forgive myself. I cannot lose him. Not him too. “I know what it’s like to be responsible for a people. To need to protect them above yourself. And I know what it’s like to feel like you have no choice but to do things you otherwise would never do.”

He frowns. Turns fully, now, to regard me curiously.

A heartbeat. Two. And I cautiously, cautiously let the tiniest shard of what has happened tonight back in. It hurts, far more than any of my physical pains. But I need him to hear this.

“My name is not Vis.” I’m almost light-headed at the words. “My name is Diago, son of Cristoval. I am—I was—a prince of Suus, before the Hierarchy invaded.” I limp back over to some rubble. Sit heavily. “They killed my family and they would have killed me too if I hadn’t escaped. I’ve hidden from them for nearly five years. And in that time, the only people who found out were the Anguis.”

I let the metal flow upward from my chest, until my mask settles in place. My arm forms from the supports of my legs, and I flex it for him.

“I let them use me.” My voice breaks from behind the iron. A desolate admission to myself as much as him, now. “I let them manipulate me because I was afraid—afraid for myself, afraid for those I cared for. They made me think I didn’t have a choice. They asked for more, and more, and I gave it to them.” I let the metal retreat again. Back to my legs. Back to the armour. “You’ll serve them until you break or die, Eidhin. And in the end, you won’t have done the right thing. You won’t have made a difference. You’ll just have mitigated one tiny part of their evil, by helping them advance another.” I shake my head slowly. Letting my weary grief infuse the words. “These decisions feel so impossible. I know. The consequences fill your vision. They know we value loyalty and family and friendship above all else. But my friend, they don’t, and there will always be people for them to hurt. To threaten us with. As long as we let ourselves be their prisoners, nothing will change.” I hesitate. “And in the end, they will destroy the ones we love anyway,” I whisper.

Eidhin sits. As stunned as I have ever seen him. He looks at me as if I am a stranger, and I cannot think of a glance that has hurt more, though I see no anger in it. Only lost, sad confusion.

Silence, and I stare at the ground miserably.

“You were forced to do this. To be … this.” He finally gestures. Says the words not as a question, but as a reassurance to himself. A desperation to believe it.

“No. I told myself I had no choice, but I did. That’s the point. I should have drawn my line long ago.” I take a deep breath. Lump in my throat, but then I’m crushing it down ruthlessly once again. Perhaps it is unfair to tell him this now. But he needs to know. “Eidhin, Aequa is dead. Decimus killed her in front of me today, because Iro died.” His face twists in unaffected pain but I press on, not letting the emotion stop me. “You once told me that death is meaningless if it does not change us. I can’t take back what I helped begin, can’t change any of this. But I can at least try to make it matter.”

He sits there. Horror painting his features. In shock, but he also knows the urgency of our situation, knows that whatever decision he makes must be made now.

“I have many, many questions. Most of them can wait. But I need you to answer me at least this one,” he says eventually. “These men—Redivius, Laurentius, Decimus—they are all the same. One monster with different faces. So what is your plan? Why should—”

“Breac?” The voice echoes in the abandoned alley. Only a moment’s notice and then the other man Eidhin was with appears, spear at the ready. Eyes widening as he spots me. My missing arm. “You’re Catenicus.”

“Siollan.” Eidhin puts up his spear, spreading his hands to indicate there’s no threat.

Siollan’s eyes flash to black.

It happens so fast. Eidhin steps between me and his comrade. Siollan’s face twists. Jumpy, or overeager, or just not willing to risk talking—it doesn’t matter. He’s angry, or scared, and his spear is in his hand. Arm cocked back. I send metal shards at him as he hurls, take him in the throat with a slashing, gurgling spray, but I’m too late. The spear is already airborne. Eidhin firmly in its path.

Then Diago is there, leaping.

The spear takes him in the throat.

There’s a heartbeat where I don’t believe it. A sharp howl of pain from the animal as it staggers back.

“NO!” I’m screaming the word. The alupi is on his side, twitching and yelping, the sound shrill. Siollan’s glassy eyes stare upward. Eidhin’s hands fall to his side in dismay and shock as I skid to my knees next to Diago; his teeth are bared and he almost looks like he’s going to snap at me, but I put a hand on his head and he just wheezes as I stroke him. Biting in occasional helplessness at the protruding haft.

“Vek.” I don’t know what to do. There’s blood covering my hands, but somehow, not as much as there should be. Perhaps it has missed the artery? “Do we pull it out?”

Eidhin is on his knees by my side. Gestures helplessly. “Won’t that just make it worse?”

I groan, using my blade to slice through the haft. “You’ll be alright. You’ll be alright,” I murmur to the wolf, the desperation in my voice a prayer.

Diago is still snarling, but he staggers to his feet. Eyes red. Dribbling blood from his mouth.

“How is he still standing?” whispers Eidhin, patting him as if the act will somehow heal his wounds. I press my head gently against the animal’s. It seems to calm him, just enough.

“I don’t know.” Heart pounding with terror and hope. The alupi should be bleeding out but he seems merely injured. Seems. “Rotting gods. We need to get him back to Domus Telimus.”

Eidhin gazes at the dead soldier. Closes his eyes. “Siollan was here for his Septimii, too. No different to me.”

“He was different because he had no option. You do.”

“Do I?” Eidhin finally looks at me. “You want me to come with you? How would me fighting beneath someone like Decimus be any better than this?”

“It wouldn’t be. Which is why I’m not asking you to. Gods, I intend to make sure Decimus sees justice and there is only one way that can happen.” I leave no doubt how serious I am about the last, that seething ice in my stomach back and focusing me again. “Your father has taken care of my going back, anyway; the Senate will think I’m a traitor soon enough. He probably thought it would force me to go with you. But there is another path.”

Eidhin frowns. “Which is?”

“We let this battle run its course without us, and use the enemy of our enemy to try and end the war.” I exhale. Can barely believe I’m saying it aloud, but this is the only way. “I think this whole conflict was started to disrupt the plans of the Concurrence, somehow. Princeps Exesius was working with someone. Ceding to them, along with the other two Princeps. It had to have been the man Veridius told us about. Ka. Not some unknowable force, Eidhin. A person. And a person can be negotiated with.”

Eidhin looks at me. “A person who wants to cause another Cataclysm, and kill you,” he eventually says disbelievingly. Clearly choosing, at least for now, to disregard what I said about the Princeps’s ceding in favour of my more pressing madness.

“But who for some reason didn’t want this war.” It’s the only thing that makes sense. The only thing that fits with everything I know. “And is now short a Princeps.”

Silence.

“I know it sounds insane, but think about it,” I urge grimly. “I have a combination of things that none of these Quartii have. A family with a long Military tradition. A name big enough within the Senate to legitimise a claim. Popular support from Octavii and Septimii. Strong ties to Governance. I’m young, yes, but the pretenders have already thrown out tradition in order to favour strength as the only qualification, so, gods—if I can really threaten them, there’s a good chance I can get at least some to fall in line without bloodshed! And given what we know about Ka, a real threat is something he might just be able to provide.” I lick my lips. “I know it’s desperate but we are desperate, Eidhin. Ka won’t trust me. Probably will still aim to kill me, once I’ve served his purpose. But if he truly needs a return to stability for some reason—and given everything I’ve learned, I have to believe that he does—then I may actually be his best option. And that makes him ours.”

Eidhin runs a hand through his hair. Looking lost. “So to be clear: you want to go to the man who intends to destroy the world. Strike a deal to help him. Free my people. Become Princeps of Military. Bring an end to the civil war.”

“It’s ambitious,” I allow.

He grunts. “And then we stop him?”

“No, then we let him kill everyone.”

He glares. “Just making certain,” he mutters to my sarcasm. “And if all this man wants is for the Cataclysm to occur, and you—perhaps our only hope of preventing it—present yourself to him for a nice easy killing?”

“Then the inevitable just happens sooner, because we’re all dying anyway right now. Dying because greedy men want more. If you go out there, you will die. If I stay near Decimus, I will die. Perhaps not today, or tomorrow, but soon. And it will be for nothing.” I clench my fist. “Redivius. Decimus. Religion, Governance, Military, the Anguis. They’re burning the world, Eidhin, and they’re not stopping. If we let them, if all the good people end up dead, what’s even left worth saving?”

Eidhin gazes at the body across from us. Diago whines in pain, but is still, somehow, standing.

“Alright. Alright,” he says softly. Disbelievingly. “If this works, we rescue my people. If it doesn’t, then … well. I suppose everyone dies and it does not matter. So how do we make contact with him?”

I sigh. Let the metal mask form again.

“I stop hiding.”







LXXVIII




MY FOOTSTEPS ARE SWALLOWED AS I HURRY ALONG the vast, gold-lit colonnade crowned by the luminous pyramid ahead. The Sanctum has been a shell. Eerily, utterly empty. No sign of movement at all since the Overseers closed the massive obsidian gates behind me.

No hint as to whether the quiet is Ka’s doing, or Kiya’s. I pour more speed into my stride. Every moment she gives me is of value.

The triangular tunnel entrance across to Ka’s pyramid soon looms ahead. Soundless and dark, but this time it feels different. Hollow. Cautious fear dictates a pausing at its edge, a peering into its shadows, but I can see no silhouettes. No lurking forms attached high to the inwardly sloping walls.

I clench my hands into sticky, stinging fists, ensuring the blood from the cuts I made a few minutes ago is still flowing. Then I step into the darkness.

Nothing happens.

It takes me five minutes of anxious walking to cross. Every footstep echoes. My eyes strain, but aside from the distant triangle of golden light that marks the opening to the other side, I can see nothing of my surrounds. I keep to the middle of the path. Quick but careful. My alertness comes to nothing.

And then I am through, and out, blinking, into the radiance of the Pyramid of Ka.

The stairway stretches upward before me, each step lit with a fuzzing, thrumming line of gold. A thousand of them, at least, and the only door I can see is at the top. The very ground emanates heat, vibrates unsettlingly beneath my feet.

I start the climb.

After the first hundred stairs, the cover of the tall surrounding walls left behind, I feel naked. No shadows to hide in here. No side streets. No careful management of pace and positioning to avoid eyes. I am brightly lit, a lone figure steadily ascending the most visible structure in the city. Any eye turned this way will see me.

And many do.

I keep my pace steady, despite the temptation to climb as quickly as possible. I cannot afford to be exhausted by the time I face Ka. And so I stop every so often. Turn to find at first a few curious onlookers, then more, until finally it feels as though the streets are clogged with upturned faces. Silent, as far as I can tell. Watching with confusion? Fascination? Horror?

I am treading sacred ground, and Ka has not struck me down.

The city looks almost peaceful from so high up. I can see clear across the river to Neter-khertet, the green glow of the streets there flooding upward to create an ugly miasma, an ephemeral cloud that screams of death and decay. I see Westerners gathered over there, too; some are watching me, some are going about their daily business. Many more are clumped around the end of the shattered bridge, back some way to avoid the notice of the Gleaners which still glide ethereally over the now-smooth waters.

An Overseer must surely have spotted my progress by now, but none of Ka’s iunctii even twitch in my direction. The Overseers themselves cannot follow me, not here. But the Gleaners could, if they were informed.

Kiya’s interference continues to work. I wonder for how much longer.

I continue trudging upward. Higher and higher. Twenty minutes. Forty. No hint of resistance. The terrifying thrum of energy and pulse of golden light my only companions. Through my constant anxious checking of the scenes below, I cannot help but again wonder at what will happen, should I be successful here. Am I about to kill some, or even all, of the iunctii as well? I have no clear concept of what infrastructure Ka might be supporting through simply being alive.

But over my shoulder, I see the Aurora Columnae in the Sanctum pulsing more brightly than ever, too. It reminds me of Caeror’s exhortations. His brother and my friends in the world we left behind. The risk of something terrible happening here, or the certainty of it happening there.

And I press on.

It takes almost an hour to reach the entrance. My legs ache by the end despite my attempts at managing my pace, breath coming in hard gasps as I’m faced with a door made entirely of gold. Similar in construction to the mutalis door in Qabr, but no crook and flail on this one. Just a single, large symbol.

A scarab.

Unlike both Qabr and the rest of this pyramid, though, the door is oddly still, not pulsing and flickering and vibrating with the unsettling rhythm that I’ve almost become accustomed to over the past hour. I frown, then push against it tiredly. The scarab seems to flicker, just for a moment.

The door doesn’t move.

I push again, harder, but this time nothing at all happens. I wipe sweat from my brow and take a slow, deep breath to fight off the panic. There will be a way to open it. There has to be.

I glance around, my gaze sweeping the city below. Duat looks so calm from up here; I can barely see the people now. Except, I realise, for the Gleaners. They’re in a swarm. Seem bigger than everyone else.

“Oh, vek.” Not now. I’m so close. I snatch out my knife, slice across my palm again and grip my weapons. Slam the crook into the door as it thrums to life beneath my grasp.

It bounces off with a dull, metallic clang.

I try again twice more in frenzied panic before I recover myself enough to accept that it’s not working. Vek vek vek. The Gleaners are getting closer. Arrowing toward me. No question that they know I’m here.

“Think,” I mutter in desperate self-exhortation. “Think think think think think.”

Of course this door wasn’t destroyed by the mutalis; it’s surrounded by the stuff. But it’s inactive, too. Like my weapons.

I slam my bloodied hand against the scarab.

It quivers, thrums. Flickers.

The door swings open.

There’s a gold-lit stairwell. Descending, this time. I rush inside and try to shut the door again, but it won’t budge.

Rotting gods. No time. I give up, grip my thrumming weapons tightly, and bolt downward.



THE LONG, WINDING STAIRCASE HAS NO DEFENCES. NO one and nothing guarding the way. No traps. Not even any side openings. I think I can hear sounds of pursuit but the Gleaners will have to navigate like normal people, down here, too narrow a space for flight. The interior of the pyramid, however, does not pulse and quiver with mutalis. They won’t need to worry about making contact with its surface.

Once I stop, I doubt I’ll have long before they catch up to me.

I dash recklessly downward for what must be at least a couple of minutes before I reach another door. Simple wood, this time; I push it open with a mixture of urgency and caution, but there is no sound, no movement from beyond.

I slink into a massive chamber. The roof slants upward to a point a hundred feet above; the room itself is at least as wide and long. All hard angles and black obsidian, lit by the same golden lines as the rest of the pyramid.

I stare around at its contents, more bemused than anything else. Tall, long bookshelves create row upon row across the centre of the room, scrolls jutting haphazardly from slots clearly made for holding them. Around the edges of the room are several desks, each one covered in more paper. There are comfortable-looking seats. A couch in the corner.

I hurriedly drag the nearest desk so that it’s blocking the door—it won’t stop the Gleaners, but it might give me some precious extra seconds—and then snatch up one of the pieces of paper on it. Handwritten largely in glyphs, with some sort of technical diagram and notes in what might be ancient Vetusian in places, though I’m not inclined to divert my focus to translation right now.

“Vek,” I mutter, tossing it aside and looking around again. I’m not sure what I was expecting, but this feels more like a library than the home of a god-masquerading immortal. It’s messy, in the same way I remember Praeceptor Taedia’s office being at the Academy. The product of an absent mind, maybe, but hardly a genocidal one.

No time to ponder it, though; I can already imagine the Gleaners clambering down the stairs. I push on into the room, skirting the central shelves, eyes darting for anything of significance.

I’m almost halfway across the space when I spot the triangular stone table, and the finely clothed man lying atop it.

I freeze. A breath to reassure myself that he’s not moving, not reacting to my presence, and then thrumming weapons at the ready, I hurry over. Asleep? No. It’s more shrine than bed, made of the same obsidian as everything else in here. The man’s arms are at his side and his eyes are closed, but there’s a stillness to his repose that speaks of more than just slumber.

There are lines around the table’s edge. An inscription that pulses. All glyphs; I don’t know their meaning but I recognise at least some of them.

The same as were written on the sarcophagus, in the room where I got the crook and flail.

I stop in front of the table. Lost. I don’t know what I was expecting, but this wasn’t it; there are no exits, nowhere else Ka might be hiding in here that I can see. But this stranger looks … normal. A handsome man in his mid-forties. A short beard, wavy black hair. More Catenan colouring than those from Duat tend to have, I suppose, but otherwise no different to anyone I might pass on the streets far below.

I walk around him. Careful not to touch the stone on which he’s lying. I feel a pulse coming from it. A Vitaerium? I close my eyes. There are traces of Will trailing away from each of the three corners of the table. Doing what, though, I can only guess.

It has to be him. It has to be. No one has been seen coming or going from this pyramid in living memory. And I don’t have time to be cautious.

“If I’ve got this wrong, then I am so sorry,” I mutter.

I carefully touch my crook to his chest.

Nothing happens.

It is Ka.

I exhale. Unsure whether to be relieved or horrified. This is so much easier, and so much worse. “I thought you’d be awake.” My lip curls in frustration as I say the words to the catatonic man. “I thought I’d get the chance to talk to you. To ask why you’ve done all this. To understand.” I slowly release my white-knuckled grip on my crook and flail. Hook them back on my belt, and draw my knife. Hover it over his chest.

A crashing at the door. A series of urgent, heavy thumps.

“Kiya better have been right about you controlling those things,” I mutter. Heart pounding. Sweating. Still delaying, still hesitant, even now. “Or this is going to be a very short gods-damned celebration.”

I have to do this. For the people he’s enslaved. For Caeror. For Emissa, for Callidus and Eidhin and Aequa back home. This man may look unassuming, here in front of me. But he has done monstrous things. Monstrous things. And will continue to, unless I stop him.

My father never sentenced a man to death. And yet he told me once that the price of a life cannot be incalculable to a ruler, no matter how much we wish it were so. That in the end, there would be situations in which we simply had to value it for ourselves, and live with the consequences.

There’s a splintering sound at the door. Pieces of wood clattering to stone. The Gleaners are through.

I push the knife into Ka’s heart.







LXXIX




I WAKE ON A BED OF FURS. SUNLIGHT STREAMS IN through a window. I am in a hut, not dissimilar to the one I was first kept in when I arrived at Caer Áras, but more spacious. I am alone.

I groan. Slowly, cautiously, prod at my body. Bruised but not broken. Wounds still there, but bandaged. I am in fresh clothes, and wrapped in a pure white cloak that suggests my claims during the battle have not been disputed, though I see no sign of Lir’s staff. Whoever treated me left the scarab medallion around my neck, tucked against my chest. Fortunate. I cannot imagine I would have survived any other way; I can still barely believe that I am breathing. I even, briefly, check my own heartbeat, admitting some relief when I feel its steady thumping against my palm.

And then I bring my silver arm up in front of my face.

It is still attached. Still works. I close the hand into a fist and open it again, waggling the fingers, marvelling at how it feels just like the real thing. Partly as if I was using the nasceann, my sense of it intimate, a true extension of myself. Partly as I was taught it should work in Res, with complete mental command over it and its moving parts.

I still don’t understand how it’s possible. How and why I was able to unconsciously imbue it as I did.

But it seems that I may, at least, still have the opportunity to try and find out one day.

I lie there for a while, then summon the energy to move. Slowly, stiffly rise to my feet, grasping the nearby table to prevent myself from simply falling straight back down. I hear voices from outside. Light and laughing, relaxed, and perhaps some children farther in the distance.

I open the door. A couple of warriors are lounging against the wall of the hut opposite, but the one facing me cuts short his conversation as soon as he spots me. His eyes go wide and he mutters something to the woman with him before hurrying off.

I stand there as the woman, and several others on the street, stare at me. Saying nothing. I sway a little, and bring up my silver hand to grasp the doorframe. Their eyes all go to it. It shines in the light of the winter sun.

“Deaglán!”

I turn, a hopeful, joyous smile creeping across my face. Tara is striding down the street. Smiling too, a broad, genuine thing that lights up her face in a way I haven’t seen before. The warmth is so foreign on her that I almost laugh.

There’s movement past her and I can see Conor charging behind, grinning fiercely. Fearghus and Seanna flank him. Miach just after them. They are all whooping and hollering like madmen. All of them.

I do laugh, this time. Loud and joyous.

“Tara, I—” I cut off with a grunt as I’m enveloped in an entirely too rough embrace, first by Tara and then immediately followed by the others, the group turning into a happy, bruising, laughing, jumping clump of excitement that I am powerless to escape. Eventually my pained protests make it through to them and they stop, albeit with a series of jibes at how weak I must be to not even withstand a gentle hug.

“The siege?” I ask it first, though I think I know the answer from their presence, not to mention the light feeling in the air here.

“Broken, four days ago. Fiachra’s men fled. Terrified of you. The great draoi nasceann.” Tara’s eyes shine as she looks at me. “And the Grove has been forced to distance themselves from Fiachra as a result. Draoi Uallach, from King Nuadha’s lands, was here during the attack and has gone to speak with them on behalf of Caer Áras. He departed yesterday with your staff”—I open my mouth to indicate dismay—“but gave his oath it would be returned. He was a friend of Lir’s, and according to some of my father’s men, another critic of the Grove’s deal with Fiachra. He left your cloak as an assurance that your status is not to be challenged.”

“Except by Ruarc, I imagine,” I observe with a weary grin. Tara seems confident this Draoi Uallach is to be trusted. I am content to trust her.

“That will not matter anymore. Ruarc has surrendered.”

“What?”

“This morning.” It’s Conor jumping in, clapping me on the back far too firmly before realising what he’s doing and giving an apologetic wince. “Came to the gates and gave himself up.”

“Why?”

“He hasn’t said, but we’re assuming the Grove has turned on him.” Miach, quiet as usual.

“But he did have one stipulation.” Tara again, some of her initial excitement fading to seriousness. “He said he had to talk to you before anything was done to him.”

I frown. “Did he know I was like this?” I gesture broadly to the swathes of bandage.

“He knew. He just believed you would survive.” Tara eyes me, her smile returning. “I was with him on that much.”

“We all were,” says Seanna quickly. The others immediately roar their dissent at her, and she holds up her hands, blushing even as she laughs. “I have never been more happy to be wrong, Deaglán. Truly.”

I laugh with them, painful though the motion is, their infectious enthusiasm impossible to not be swept up in. I am glad, too, I realise. Everyone else on the street is gathering, peering, straining for a glimpse of my silver hand. Of me. Some part of me was already worried my friends would see me differently too.

I am ushered back inside, made to sit.

“I assume you want to know about the arm?” I ask, once we’re all comfortable.

“No,” says Conor immediately, shaking his head.

Fearghus sighs. “Why would we want to know that?”

“Dull,” adds Tara.

I look around at them, not saying anything for a second, then, “Alright, well what about—”

Their shouts drown out my words, insisting I tell them all about the gods-cursed arm immediately or they would finish the job Gallchobhar was too incompetent to do.

So I tell them. Everything that happened since we parted, the whole truth, with the exception of my time in Fornax, which Tara carefully steers me away from. I wasn’t going to go into that part, anyway. I know Lir wouldn’t have wanted me to.

I fall silent after I explain about my father. He must have overheard that Gallchobhar intended to sacrifice me to the lake, and so hid himself underwater. Probably waited there for hours. Knowing what would happen to him. Knowing that if I was thrown in, it would be because I had ignored his warnings.

“We found his body, I think,” Tara interjects gently into the quiet. When I look at her, she nods. “He floated ashore downriver. White robes.”

I swallow. “Has he been given the rites?”

“Not yet.” She fidgets. “Most of the funeral arrangements have been centred around my father, these past few days.”

I nod. Sympathy and pain and understanding in the look I give her, though I know she will not want words to accompany them.

“Tonight, though. You should farewell him tonight.” She moves on brusquely, and I nod again. A lump suddenly in my throat, but she’s right. It has been four days. It cannot wait longer.

“I need to see him.” My heart suddenly cannot take it anymore and I stand, ignoring the dizziness that sweeps through me.

Conor grips my arm. Steadies me.

“We will take you,” he says.

As we walk at a staggeringly slow pace, me leaning on Tara and Conor in turn, they tell me how Gallchobhar had decimated so many of the surrounding villages that it had made King Rónán’s attempts to find support near impossible. About their own mad dash for the caer to arrive barely ahead of Fiachra’s siege, a desperate final fight just to reach the gate with a dozen other surviving warriors they had managed to collect along the way. Conor and Seanna do most of the describing of the latter, making it sound a grand, glorious epic full of near misses and impossible bravery. I believe every word of it.

As we walk through the caer, conversation fades as we pass. Twice, I move to conceal my silver arm beneath my cloak. Both times, Tara gently pushes it back into view. Whispers follow us, and I hear the name “Silverhand” more than once.

My father’s body is interred in a cool, dark cave. The torchlight enough for me to see his features and know it is him in the stillness of the tomb.

I press the medallion against his cheek. Five seconds. Ten.

He never stirs.

I swallow tears, and lean down and kiss him on his cold forehead.

When we return to the caer, a small crowd is waiting. At first I pay them no mind, knowing that most of them have come only to see the curiosity of my arm. But then there is motion, waving from their midst, and I catch sight of the blonde-haired form pushing her way forward.

“Gráinne?” My heart leaps as I run forward to greet the woman who saved me all those months ago. Her smile is wide as she reaches the front of the mob. An instant later, Róisín and Tadhg are there too. Bigger in size, older around their eyes. But still with a childlike joy as they rush at me with smiles that split their young faces, gazes inevitably and unabashedly fixed upon the oddity of my arm.

I smile back, even as it’s tinged with the sadness of realisation as I take them in.

“Deaglán Silverhand. The great hero.” Gráinne comes to a hesitant halt in front of me, brow furrowing as she sees my expression. “What is wrong?” Still speaking in that same careful way she did six months ago, though I no longer need it.

“Onchú,” I say gently.

She frowns at me, confused.

“What about Onchú?” comes a gruff voice from my side.

I turn. Onchú stands a few feet away. Hale and whole. Arms crossed as he assesses me.

“Onchú!” My smile broadens into pure delight, and I wrap the man in a fierce, jubilant hug, lifting him off the ground. He groans and struggles, taken aback, as the others laugh; a moment later I’m embracing them too, laughing as well. Dazed. Delighted.

“I was at Didean,” I explain. “I saw the cairn outside your hut, and I thought …”

Gráinne’s eyes widen, and Onchú, still recovering from the force of my embrace, stifles a chortle.

“What?”

They look at each other.

“It was a sheep,” Gráinne says.

I stare at her as she’s unable to restrain a smirk.

“It happened weeks before the attack. It got sick. Tadhg tended it for almost a month, by himself. He became very attached and when it died …”

“A sheep,” I repeat darkly.

“A sheep,” Onchú confirms.

I close my eyes, and after a long, disbelieving breath, laugh again. Relief and joy and released grief and a hundred other emotions I can’t even identify in it.

“It is not funny,” says Tadhg indignantly from the side.

I turn to him and embrace him around the head, struggle to get away though he does. “I am very sorry about the sheep, Tadhg. But I am also so very glad to see you.”

He continues to fight my grip for another second, then gives up and hugs me back.

“We wanted to see you, before we go. We are leaving in a few hours,” says Gráinne, a little apologetically. She shrugs at my look. “The farm has to be rebuilt. And now that Fiachra’s forces are broken, there is no danger.” She pauses. “You could come back with us, if you want.”

“You could do all of our work now that you have two hands,” adds Róisín.

I stick out my tongue at her grin. Hesitate as I glance across at Tara, who has seen I’m otherwise engaged and is chatting idly with a couple of older warriors nearby. There is merit, and some temptation, to the offer. The promise of a simpler life. A happier life.

And yet I can’t help but remember that last conversation with my father. Poor luck is being aware of these currents, but able only to drown in them.

“I need to be here,” I tell Gráinne. Sadness to it, but certainty as well.

She gives a small smile, and nods. She already knew the answer.

“But we are all here now, today,” I add. “And there is nothing stopping us from sharing a meal together before you go.”

Gráinne’s smile widens into something warm, and Onchú slaps me on the back. “I would like that,” he says gruffly. The children nod their eager agreement as well.

And we walk back into the caer together.



MY FATHER’S FUNERAL IS SOLEMN, AND LARGE, AND BEAUtiful.

The people of Caer Áras did not know him, but Tara told them that he was a king and so he is treated as such. We march at dusk. He is wrapped in white cloth. A single, intricate gold torc around his neck. I help carry him slowly down the street from the centre of the Caer, cradling him on my shoulder, steadying him with my real arm. Tara is opposite, Conor and Miach and Fearghus and Seanna behind us. I feel his body through the fabric, and though it is cold and stiff, I cradle it lovingly anyway. I know he is gone, that he cannot feel it. I still act as if he can.

As we walk, the people line the way and they sing. The dirge is low and mournful and achingly beautiful. There are no tears, no wailing, but those would have been false given that they did not know the man. This display is for the living. This display is for me. It means more than I can say. It brings tears to my eyes again and again as we make our steady way down the hill and out the gate.

The torches are lit, lining the way down toward the lake. The sky is sprayed gold and purple, wisps of cloud catching the colour and reflected in the still water. The pyre is by the shore. We place my father’s body on it. I am handed a torch. I stand there. Knowing everyone is watching but not wanting to do it. Not wanting to let go.

I reach out, lean over and grip his shoulder. Just as he did to me, at the end.

I touch the torch to the kindling, and step back to join Tara and the others.

The singing has continued and as the flames rise higher it crescendos, a sorrowful, strong melody that echoes away over the darkening water.

I weep. I did not want to. I wanted to be strong in front of everyone. I wanted to show these people their stoic draoi nasceann. But I cannot help it. My head bows, and I choke, and tears fall as the music swells.

A hand in mine. Tara’s. I squeeze it, hold it tight amidst the pain.

And then my friends are around me. Forming a protective circle. Heads bowed, close to mine. Arms around me. And I let go. I cry. I cry for the father I thought I lost years ago but now have in truth. I cry in a way I never did after Suus, because I was never afforded a chance to say goodbye. And saying goodbye like this hurts. It hurts.

My friends hold me up. Patient. Just being there.

When I am finally done, the singing has stopped and the fire has died down and most have departed. I wipe my eyes and laugh in mildly embarrassed fashion and smile around at my friends, trying to show how much they mean to me. Tara still holds my hand. I embrace her for a long moment, then reluctantly disentangle our fingers.

We clear away the ashes and gather my father’s bones, burned clean and white. Then the six of us walk in silence along the shore. Off the paths, through the trees, only our torches to show the way now.

We walk for twenty minutes. The grove is a surprise to me when we enter it. Large and tranquil and picturesque, completely detached from the outside world despite being so close to Caer Áras. Cairns rise at intervals. Beautifully decorated stonework over their entrances.

Tara leads me to one a short distance in. Above its archway is carved a symbol, done with care and artistry. Three whorls, joined in the centre.

I lay his bones with care into their final resting place. We close the cairn and seal it tight. The others retreat but Tara and I stand there, just looking at it.

“I have seen this before,” I say softly, touching the whorls with my silver hand. “What does it mean?”

“The triskeles? Many things, depending.” Tara stares at the symbol. “Here? That he was not of this world, but belonged in it. I chose it as a symbol of honour and respect. I may never have spoken to your father, but I know him through his actions and through you. That is more than enough.”

Another lump. I give her a small smile, though she does not see it, her own gaze fixed on a cairn not far away.

“Your father?” I ask.

She just nods.

We walk over. Tara puts her hand on the stone of the entrance, as if caressing it. “He sacrificed himself for me.”

“He was your father.”

She nods slowly. “He was my father,” she repeats softly. “He would have liked you. Gods. He would have loved you for what you did.”

I chuckle. “If he was anything like my father, he would have loved anyone willing to fight for his people.”

“Our people,” corrects Tara absently.

I glance across at her. Nod.

“Our people,” I agree quietly.



RUARC IS BEING HELD IN THE SAME HUT AS I WAS, THAT first visit to Caer Áras. Secure but clean, not terribly uncomfortable. I am not sure whether to be surprised. He has caused these people so much pain. His orders have killed hundreds of their family and friends, ravaged the countryside.

I know they have not forgiven him. Will pour scorn and contempt upon him when the time comes for his sentencing. But they are not petty. They are better than that, and I am unaccountably proud to be welcome among them.

I am admitted not long before dawn by two guards who give deep, respectful nods to me before they lock the door behind me. I am alone, as Ruarc requested, though Tara was displeased by my acquiescing. I will be cautious, but cannot imagine there is any danger to me.

“Silverhand.” The druid is in a corner, features shrouded in shadow. It is early, but my arrival clearly hasn’t woken him. His voice is calm. Almost amused, though not mocking in any way.

“How did you guess?”

A low chuckle. “You jest, but it’s hard not to recognise a fellow traveller.” He steps forward, into the light. Ruarc is older than me, but not by as much as I expected—ten years at most, and I only estimate that much from the miles in his eyes. Clean-shaven, dark and lean, muscles toned beneath his tattoos. A single iron torc at his neck, the terminals intricate triskeles, like on my father’s cairn and in Fornax. The symbols glow faintly to my sight. Imbued. His handsomeness is marred by scars stretching along the left side of his face, from cheek to where his ear should be. He touches the mass. “‘The passage to Luceum requires a toll to ensure validity.’ Did you know that’s why the Old Ways state that only the unblemished can rule? Even after all this time.” He shakes his head absently. Conversational rather than bitter.

I stare. Recognising the words before I even register the language. Ancient Vetusian, written above those symbols beyond the Labyrinth. The ones I placed my hands into to try and escape. The ones that cost me my arm.

“Who are you?” I wasn’t sure what to expect, but this wasn’t it.

“My name was Caeror.” He says it in Common, harsh to my ears after so long. “I arrived here almost eight years ago, the same way you did.”

It takes me a moment to process it. To translate the words into the language I think in, now.

Then, a chill. I can see the resemblance. “You are Ulciscor’s brother,” I breathe, in Common as well.

Ruarc freezes. Genuinely startled. “You knew him?” The first time he has appeared anything but in control.

“He is the one who …” I trail off, gesturing helplessly at the enormity of trying to explain all the events that led to my coming here. “He sent me to the Academy to investigate your murder.”

A flicker of sadness. Ruarc swallows. Nods as he composes himself. “Yes. Well. I assumed the other versions of me never made it. I was never able to do anything like that.” He gestures to my glinting arm. “I am fortunate, in many ways. If they had survived, I may never have learned the truth. I would have been hunted. As I had to do with you.”

He lets the last part hang.

“Why?” I don’t bother to hide my frustrated confusion at the confession. “And why just give yourself up, now, after all of this?”

“I surrendered because everything has changed. One of your counterparts has made a terrible mistake, Silverhand, and it became imperative that we speak. No matter the cost to me.” He puts his hands to his throat and removes his torc. Holds it out to me. “As for the rest? Answers, if you would have them. The truth behind the war we are fighting, and the reasons for what I had to do. For what must yet be done.”

I look at him. I have been calm thus far, but this man has wrought so much destruction, so much death, upon a world not even his own. I think of all the bodies that lay alongside my father’s, still awaiting their rites. The hundreds of men and women I now know were slaughtered in the surrounding villages. He has come into Luceum, this place I have come to love, and he has tried to tear it apart.

I reach down and take the torc from him. Hold it up to inspect it in my silver hand. Closer to my eyes, there’s no mistaking the gentle glow of imbuing.

With a single squeeze, I crush it.

“NO!” The shout rips from Ruarc’s throat and he leaps forward, prevented from reaching me by his bonds. The light of imbuing vanishes from the crumpled metal in my hand, the triskeles barely recognisable anymore. “Why?”

“I don’t know what this was, Ruarc. A trap, or something that genuinely would have informed me. Either way, I was never going to put it on.” My hands shake with anger, but my voice is cold and calm. “I may listen to your story, in time. From you. But not tonight. Not yet.”

Ruarc scowls. “Why not?”

I hold up the crumpled iron torc. Pause, let the sight of it sink in. “Because tonight, I cannot guarantee that I will not do this to you as well.”

I spin and head for the door.

“The draoi. Do not tell them what you are, Silverhand. Do not tell anyone who you truly are or you may find yourself responsible for far worse than a few hundred dead.” He calls it after me. Pleading. “Say nothing, do nothing, until I have explained everything to you. Promise me.”

I shiver at both the certainty of his words, and their import. Nod slowly. “Not until I have heard you, Ruarc.”

I shut the door behind me, and stride toward the breaking dawn.







LXXX




THE WAR FOR CATEN RAGES AROUND US BENEATH AN enveloping night sky, stars shrouded by smoke and drifting grit. The dust-choked streets are lit now only either by torches carried by mobs, or the sporadic fires illuminating the devastation of the Will shells that lit them. Everything is cast in shadows and silhouette against deep, angry reds. Screams and clashing shouts echo. Sometimes distant. Sometimes so close and unexpected that we are forced to take cover.

Eidhin and I stagger on, and fight, and stagger on some more. I keep my metal mask on and arm half formed, barely enough pieces to complete the illusion and still be able to walk. We hide from the larger companies of both sides, but step in wherever we find Octavii and Septimii being hunted by individual legionnaires. Show ourselves to anyone who isn’t a threat, too. Each time I pretend I don’t feel the grinding ache of what I’m doing to my body, or the cold rage that drives me, or any of the grief that I keep buried firmly beneath it all, and stand tall, and tell all who will listen to spread the word that Carnifex is fighting for them.

Some curse me fearfully for what I have brought upon the city. Far fewer than I expect, though.

In between, we rest, and I send my imbued shards high into the air as a signal to Ka, and as we apprehensively wait I explain the missing pieces of my life to my friend. I don’t know how long it’s been since we started. Hours? Diago, at least, is being treated back at Domus Telimus, a brief stop and a dismayed Kadmos behind us. And I sent multiple messages warning Tertius Ericius of my bad information, though I have no idea whether any of them reached him before the first Will shells started to fall in the Forum.

“What happens if this other man—Ostius—finds us first?” Eidhin pants at one point as we stumble to a seat in a darkened alley, snatching a few precious moments of rest after another skirmish. He’s doing the bulk of the fighting. My metal blades are effective at range, but my lack of true mobility means I have to hang back and simply assist him most of the time.

“He won’t.” I tear another strip of cloth and bind the new wound on his leg. Shallow, but bleeding too much to ignore. “I destroyed the amulet he was using to track me.”

“The one he gave you for protection?”

“That’s the one.”

Eidhin takes a breath to say something, then looks at me, then just lets it out again. “I suppose it would be inconvenient if he tried to kill Ka while you were trying to negotiate with him,” he concedes with an exasperated mutter.

We fight on. At one point we stray too close to the front lines and suddenly there is a shifting in the air, a sweeping away of smoke and then a Transvect is screaming above us, its base lit orange by Caten’s flames. Sextii leap, slamming into the ground around us, eyes dark, breaking cobblestone with their impacts. We fling ourselves for the shadows of the nearest alley, unseen by the detachment who are already sprinting along the rubble-strewn street toward their target.

And then seconds later, an explosion from the sky. The Transvect plummets; there is a thundering, shattering roar not more than a few streets away. Dust is shoved in a wave away from the crash. Glass shatters. Through hands shielding faces, we see a plume of fire unfolding toward the heavens as the rest of the Will shells on board go up.

We stumble away. I’ve lost my sense of where we are, but Eidhin estimates the impact was close to the Forum.

I think of my remaining friends, and hope they are far from here.

Finally, though, it is too much. Even with Kadmos’s tea and my Will and fear and desperation all pulsing through me, my body cannot take anymore. I am becoming sluggish and I can see that Eidhin, stoic though he is, is the same.

“We can rest here. Just for a while.” We’re back in Alta Semita, I think. Hard to know; streets and buildings all look the same once they’re in pieces. “That house doesn’t look like it’s going to fall down.”

Eidhin barely grunts his affirmation, and we limp to the structure. Much of the back half is gone and we clamber over stone rather than use the door, but enough of the façade remains that it should hide us from the view of any passersby. I collapse to the ground, back against the wall. Eidhin crouches in front of me. Somehow, still able to stand.

“You are getting slow. Even with those blades,” he says abruptly. “You should rest.”

I stare at his eyes, red-rimmed from exhaustion, and laugh softly. “Sure.”

He doesn’t smile. “You have two broken legs, Vis. And that ‘brace’ you are using to walk is making you bleed everywhere.” I glance down, surprised to find he’s right; there are trails of blood all the way down my legs, and the base of my torn and dirtied toga is soaked in red. “I know you are a Quintus, and angry, and whatever your Dispensator made you might be dulling the pain, but your body will not last like this. It cannot. So rest, just for a few minutes, and I will keep watch. Rest, or I will make you rest.”

I scowl at him, but now I’ve sat down it feels impossible to get back up again straight away. “Fine. But I’m not going to sleep. I’ll raise the signal again.”

I send my metal shards high into the air, well above the rooftops. Carefully form them into the only meaningful shape I can think to make. An inverted Hierarchy symbol, three lines descending into a single point.

Eidhin peers upward, looking a mixture of impressed and worried. “You’re sure he will be able to see them?”

“They’re imbued. If he’s like me, and anywhere close by, it’ll catch his attention.” Alone, the Will in each shard wouldn’t be enough. Arranged together as they are, though, they pulse in my mind, clear against the smoky night.

A massive arrow in the sky, pointed directly down at us.

“Are they going to fall on top of us if you lose concentration?” Eidhin gazes upward worriedly.

“Maybe. Probably not. Don’t think so,” I reply hazily. My pounding heart is easing. No immediate danger, and as the fear departs it leaves only exhaustion in its wake.

Unwillingly, I close my eyes.



“FOR A MAN NOT SLEEPING, YOU ARE NOT VERY ALERT.”

I start and twist awake at the gruff voice in my ear. “Rotting gods.” I sit up, repressing a groan at the action. “I was thinking.”

“Ah. Practicing. This is good.” He pats me on the shoulder. “How are you feeling?”

I consider. “Better.” Not a lie, insomuch as I don’t feel as close to dying as I did when I closed my eyes. I check the pulsing symbol high above us. Still hovering where I left it. “How long?”

“A half hour.”

Too long. Not long enough. I take in Eidhin’s spent visage. “Your turn.”

“I don’t need—”

“Your turn.” I gesture upward. “It’s a big city. If he’s looking for me, we need to give him time to get close enough to see it. I can manage.”

“Not if you can’t walk and don’t have a weapon,” Eidhin observes.

I sigh, hating the logic, but he’s right. Command the hovering pieces to return, to form the braces around my legs again. The fiction of my arm. My mask. None of it’s comfortable, but once set it will stay in place. Better to do it now than be forced to under pressure.

We sit mutely for a while, and though I can see Eidhin’s eyes droop more than once, he doesn’t drift off the way I did.

“What made you change your mind?” The question comes abruptly, out almost before I realise I’m asking it. I smile weakly. “It sure as all hells wasn’t this plan.”

“That, I promise you, is true.” Eidhin stirs. Massages his shoulder, which took a hit from a Sextus earlier. “No. The measure of a man is not whether he does the wrong thing. It is whether he accepts that he has. When you told me the truth—showed me that mask …” He sighs heavily. “I was angry. I still am. But you were right. About crossing lines because we feel forced to. Perhaps we will save my people from Redivius, perhaps we will not—but if I had pressed on, if I had stayed trapped, it would have eventually been the latter.” He frowns at the ground. Speaks slowly. “But Vis? It was also because you came. You came on two broken legs, and you asked. You would not have forced me to stop, but you were willing to strip yourself bare to save me. You reminded me that we are not friends. You are my brother. My kin. To abandon you to the right and narrow path …”

He trails off. Silence, and then he drags himself to his feet. Walks over slowly and offers his hand to pull me up. “If we are staying here longer, we should try and find a position with a better view.”

I let him haul me to my feet and then wrap him in a fierce embrace before he can resist. Impossible to describe what his words mean to me.

He grunts. Allows it, then pulls away. “It is still an awful plan,” he growls.

I cough a laugh, and we start to pick our way out again across the rubble.

I round the broken wall and immediately shrink back, motioning urgently to stay quiet. Someone is standing in the street. Visible as little more than a silhouette.

Watching the house.

“Carnifex.” The voice rings out into the black.

I glance back at Eidhin, who motions that he’s going to circle around the other way. I nod affirmation, steel myself and emerge at a safe distance. “Who are you?”

“The one for whom you have been calling.” The man speaks in crisp, formal Vetusian, and it takes me a moment to recognise and translate it.

I stare. Not saying anything, thinking furiously. It’s hard to make out features but the silhouette is unsettlingly still.

No doubting who he’s saying he is, though.

I finally hold up my hands, relieved to find they are not visibly shaking. “Then I wish to negotiate.” I say it in Vetusian too, though mine isn’t as smooth or elegant. The notion still ludicrous as it leaves my mouth, but we’re here now. “I believe we may be able to help each other.” I itch to move, to do anything to feel less vulnerable. But I have to trust Eidhin will find a good position to act, should things turn violent.

“An interesting proposition, from the man who has ruined so much.” The shadow shifts. “How do you believe we can do this, Carnifex?”

“You need a replacement for Princeps Exesius, and an end to this war.” I say it as if it is not a guess. I peer at him, then, reluctantly, let my metal mask and arm melt away. “My name is Quintus Vis Telimus Catenicus, and I can give you both. I have the legitimacy and the popularity to bind these pretenders beneath me. But to do that, I need something that will force them to the table, regardless of their legions.” I close my eyes. Gods help me. “Something that will make them fear me enough to temper their ambitions.”

Another long silence. A complete lack of motion from the shadowed figure.

“You decided upon this course only hours ago,” he says eventually.

I frown. “I have been thinking about it all week, but … I suppose.”

“Why?”

“Because my options were limited.”

“Yet you evidently knew I was already looking for you. Intending to kill you, given the chance. Just as, I assume, whoever so clumsily dangled you intended to kill me.”

I swallow. Thrown by the strange and unsettling veer in conversation. “They were really limited options.”

“Undoubtedly.” Still an absence of emotion, but I imagine dry amusement in the response, this time. “Even so. When a man is Synchronous, sometimes things bleed through. Small things. Inexplicable impressions, instincts you may not normally have. A whisper of the memory of knowledge. And I think, perhaps—unless the coincidence is extraordinary—this is why we are speaking now.” Another pause. Face still shadowed. “Do you know my purpose, Catenicus?”

“To cause another Cataclysm.” No point in pretending.

“No. That is means, not purpose.” The dark shape shifts. “More than nine in every ten dead, in this world. It is a horror and heartbreak that cannot be explained in numbers or words. But that sacrifice is to save the one in ten. It is to prevent the obliteration of two worlds, and the enslavement of whichever remains.” A pause. “And as of a few hours ago, you are now the only man alive who can fulfil that purpose.”

He steps forward out of the shadows, and the flickering light of the distant fires reveals a man in his thirties, haggard and unkempt, with shoulder-length black hair. A crooked nose. Dirty and unremarkable. “I will help you. I will give you what you need. This iunctus will guide you—and your friend lurking in the shadows, if he wishes—to where you need to go, while I prepare. All I ask in return is that you truly hear what I have told you. A choice of many lives, or all of them, Catenicus. That will be your burden, now.”

There’s a scream from a few streets over. Echoing and hollow and haunting as it drifts through the hush and then cuts off abruptly. To my right, Eidhin slowly emerges from the darkness.

I feel light-headed. Nauseous. Another deception? I can’t see its purpose. It’s not something I am going to believe without proof, and a lot of it.

But I have not been asked for anything except my attention. Not yet.

And he has that, now.

“I’m listening,” I eventually say quietly.



THE FIRST BRIGHT RAYS OF DAWN KISS THE UPPERMOST tombs of Agerus as Eidhin and I trudge wearily behind the iunctus, the Necropolis and its thousands upon thousands of graves stretching away across fields divided by the flickering orange of the Eternal Flames. Beautiful, and utterly desolate. No sign of the Military personnel who would normally be here.

It took almost an hour for the iunctus to guide us to the docks through the burning and blood of Caten’s fracturing. Ka seemed to relinquish his control of the dead man before we could ask anything more; since Alta Semita our guide has been completely unresponsive to both conversation and command, calm and mechanical as he steered us unerringly around blockades and patrols and, finally, onto an empty bireme that immediately began gliding into the darkness of Caten’s harbour.

It was hours before our ship angled toward the shore again. Despite my weak protests, Eidhin spent much of the start of the journey checking my wounds and then applying fresh makeshift bandages, padding everything so that the discomfort of my crutches would not be so bad when I did have to walk again. He brushed off my gratitude with a familiar, dismissive grunt before finally tending to himself.

After that, I dozed fitfully, carefully prone, metal bracing rearranged to best ensure the shape of my legs. Too exhausted to fully stay awake. Too angry, and anxious, and heartbroken, and in pain, to sleep for long. I would slumber and then wake with a jolt to the gentle motion of the boat, and remember Aequa, and all of the helpless injustice would come thundering back, and I would lie there and stare at the night sky and let the rage that pounded my heart lend me more of its determination, second by second.

Eidhin, I think, did not even try to sleep. I often stirred to find him nearby at the bow, leaning against the railing and watching as the inky waves of the Sea of Quus broke silver against our passage. In my waking times, we talked occasionally. About what Ka said, whether it could possibly be true. About what might come next. But mostly we gazed in silence. Captives of our own thoughts and worries and grieving furies. The sharing of heavy burdens in each other’s company, even if neither of us said them aloud.

And now as we trail the dead man past graves and mausoleums, I know where we are headed. Only confirmed as we turn down the almost invisible path into the mountain and pass beneath the archway, its writing barely visible in the early dim.

Death is the door to life.

“This is where Emissa took me, when we came to see the prisoner,” I tell Eidhin grimly.

He glances at the iunctus uneasily. “Why would the Concurrence have brought us here?”

“The Concurrence have not brought you here.” We both flinch and curse at the statement of the dead man in front, abrupt in the hollowness of the thin chasm. He turns to us, and I can suddenly see an awareness in his gaze that hasn’t been there since Caten. “They are the enemy. Humanity’s enemy, which I have fought my entire life. Do not conflate us.” Delivered emotionlessly again, but he pauses, staring at each of us as if to ensure we understand, before moving on.

Eidhin and I exchange shaken looks, and follow. It does, I suppose, suggest an answer to the main question we debated on our way here. If the Cataclysms are really to stop something worse, what could be the cause of the latter?

It seems we have our answer.

My mind reels, and I can see Eidhin silently trying to make sense of it too. Was Veridius working with the Concurrence, then? No. Surely no advantage to him in deliberately obfuscating like that—and he even admitted that he had drawn his own conclusions about the ancient enemy described in the ruins, and their role in the Cataclysms.

Still. The revelation unbalances me more than it should, challenging a truth I was somehow certain of. I feel sick. Oddly horrified. As if it were important to me that my original understanding was true.

“Who are the Concurrence, then?” I say it into the hush as the iunctus lights a lantern, and we forge into the darkness of the tunnel.

The iunctus moves steadily ahead of us. “Not a ‘who.’ A ‘what.’ A self-contained latticework of iunctii. The remnants of a rogue system which once controlled the lives of hundreds of millions of people across the world. Across the world, before the Rending.”

I exchange a look with Eidhin, who shakes his head slightly. Equally baffled. “A system?”

“A great, independent machine made up of the dead. Interlinked, each one carefully purposed. More vast and complex and impossible to fight than you can imagine.” We’ve taken a different path to the one Emissa led me along, and a dead end suddenly looms in the form of a massive obsidian slab, divided into three distinct panels. The gilded symbol of the Hierarchy slices down the one in the centre.

The iunctus gestures me forward before I can probe the bizarre statement further. “There is Will imbued in the outer two sections. You need to move it to the centre. But once this door is opened, we have a matter of hours, if that, before your Military arrive to stop us. So we must move fast.”

I nod. Take a deep breath, and do as he instructs.

The polished black surface shudders, and slides into the ground.

Eidhin and I stand there as the iunctus strides through.

“Vek.” I breathe it.

“Vek,” agrees Eidhin softly.

We’re on the lowest level of a space hundreds of feet deep and at least as high, painted in eerie green light. Ahead and behind, the floor slopes upward into multiple levels, accessible via carved stairs. To our left and right, the space stretches away in both directions as far as I can see. An enormous, semi-cylindrical tunnel.

Filling it—not just along the pathways of our level but on the tiered ones above—are bodies.

I stare. Frozen. Even the numbed, ongoing agony of my legs temporarily forgotten. The entire mountain, the entire Agerus mountain range, must be hollowed out to accommodate this massive crypt. At first I think it’s a much larger version of the ruins near the Academy; certainly it feels the same, with its jade light and corpses splayed upright against white stone slabs. None of them have blades pinning them through the heart, though. They’re not naked, instead clothed in identical, simple black shifts.

And—as I peer at one of the closest ones—they stare glassily ahead. Dead, certainly, but the eyes of these corpses have not been removed.

It’s a small comfort, confronted with the scale of the thing. There are thousands of them. Tens of thousands. They stretch on forever.

“What is this place?” I whisper it, almost to myself.

“This is the Necropolis.” The iunctus beckons us to follow him, and we start along the path to our left beneath the crushing weight of a thousand blank stares. From the set of his shoulders, Eidhin is as startled and troubled as I feel, though at least there is no sign of movement, no flicker of unnatural life in any of the men or women—or children, in some cases—who we pass. “It was entirely empty when your era discovered it—more than a century ago now, I believe. It is a remnant of another time. One of our earliest attempts to build something to rival the Concurrence. Of course, your Military never figured that out; they merely use it to preserve access to knowledge. Particularly that of their foes.”

I gaze around in dazed horror. “How many?”

“Near eighty thousand.” No inflection to the statement. No judgement. “This chamber holds the most recent, but there are dozens more like it. Your people have filled this place with the slain of a century of conquests. Everyone from great leaders, to the lowest servants who may once have overheard something important. Anyone and everyone who may have something valuable still locked away somewhere in their minds.”

I can barely comprehend it as our path angles upward slightly, toward a raised platform in the centre of the enormous tunnel. A twenty-foot-wide obsidian triangle, elevated above the rows of corpses on either side. “You want me to wake some of them.” It’s the only logical conclusion.

The iunctus starts climbing. “I want you to wake all of them, Catenicus.”

His statement hangs as we ascend. I open my mouth. Shut it again and glance across at Eidhin, whose furrowed brow says he is as lost as I am as to how to respond.

“How?” I ask eventually as we reach the platform. Its surface is not one piece, as I assumed from below, but four—three triangular-cut stones for each point, and a single, upside-down one in the centre. A corpse lies within each of the outer triangles. They would look almost restful in their repose if not for the thin, two-foot-high spikes of obsidian that protrude up through their chests.

“You need only imbue these three men—they do not need more than the Will of a couple of people each. The machinery of this place will do the rest.” He sees my dissatisfaction at the explanation. “A iunctus can cede far more than it takes to wake them, which means one of the primary strengths of Synchronic Will is the ability to perform what is called a Cascade. These first three iunctii will cede to you, then utilise the remainder of their Will to wake more. Who will cede to them, and then wake more. And so on, and so on. Due to the scale at play, they have been instructed to maximise efficiency and begin creating external pyramids, once the seven levels below you have been filled. But by the end, you will have the strength of a Princeps, and an army who can be compelled to follow your commands.”

I stand there. Head spinning, heart thumping as I try to grasp what he’s telling me. This is madness. “Eighty thousand.” Still not enough to compete with a legion—it takes four times that number to create five thousand Sextii—but … gods.

“Eighty thousand who need neither food nor sleep. And who can make more of their number, if you are forced to fight.”

I pale as I take in his meaning. Feel a slow, creeping horror as I imagine the power of an army that could do what he’s suggesting. The dead of every foe adding to their number. Growing, and growing. Each battle making them stronger, and larger, and more impossible to defeat.

In a strange way, not unlike how the Hierarchy conquered the world.

“Do not do this, Vis.” There’s true dismay in Eidhin’s voice as he gazes around at the three bodies pinned to the platform. “This is … sick. Wrong. No different to what we spoke of after you were here with Emissa. For a man to die, and then his body—his mind—to be used like this. To be so trapped without even death as an end …” He turns to me, places a large hand on my shoulder. Serious blue eyes locked to mine. “Do. Not. Do. This.”

I say nothing for a long few moments. “And your kin in Redivius’s camp?”

“We will find another way.”

I nod slowly. Something oddly comforting in the strength of his hopeless conviction.

“Catenicus. I accept this may seem abhorrent, but understand—that is a sacrifice that men like you and I must inevitably make. Instead of the easy gift of our lives, we must suffer the hundred little deaths of self in order to protect this world. Not because what we do is good, but because good will no longer exist if we do not.” The iunctus steps forward. “You were right, in Caten. I need you to stop this war. And beyond that, I need what you can do, because you are now the only one who can do it. So think well. Make your decision and make it without regret, but know that if you wish to truly make a difference, you have others to come which will be much harder and mean much more.”

His voice echoes away down the green-lit tunnel, until finally we three stare at each other in silence.

I hesitate, then close my eyes. Sway from exhaustion, from the throb of my legs and the abrading pain of their braces. Kadmos’s tea has almost worn off.

The strength of the few is all that matters.

My father once told me that men become their choices, not their intentions. I wonder what he would say to me now.

Before I can change my mind I take two steps, and crouch by the first corpse, and place my hand on his forehead, and imbue him.

The thin obsidian spike jutting through his chest retracts, sliding slowly downward and vanishing into the man’s body. He sits up and his hand finds mine before I can move. Nothing spoken, but I immediately feel the small portion of Will flow into me. He releases his grasp again. Every motion stiff, deliberate. No interest or recognition in his eyes.

I shudder and don’t pause to watch what happens next. Step across and place my hand on the second cold body. Imbue. All my training makes it so easy, now.

“Vis?” Eidhin’s voice. Distant beneath my pounding heart.

“He has made his choice,” comes the iunctus’s soft reply.

As soon as the second iunctus has ceded to me, I’m moving across to the third impaled form. There’s motion in the corner of my vision. The first one is on his feet, descending from the platform with calm, mechanical intent.

I imbue the third man. Watch the black, glimmering sliver of stone retract. Allow him to give up half his Will to me.

Then take a weary seat as he stands and heads purposefully after the other two.

Minutes pass as I just watch in horrified, vaguely sick silence. First there is only the movement of the three iunctii. Then six. Then a dozen. On and on, a widening ripple of waking corpses. The Will being ceded to me builds in ever growing increments. My weariness begins to wash away, even if my misgivings do not.

“They will continue until each node is filled to its most efficient level,” says the iunctus behind me. “Once their pyramids are set, they will be unable to attack one another, or you, or leave—but will otherwise regain control of themselves. Their memories. Any further restrictions will be up to you.”

I can see more empty white slabs than occupied, now. Swathes of iunctii begin vanishing farther down the tunnel in both directions.

After a while, Eidhin finally joins me. His eyes are sad as we watch together.

“Fear is a lack of control, Eidhin,” I tell him eventually. “And I am tired of being afraid. I want to be able to see justice in the world again.”

He looks across at me sorrowfully. Nods.

“I am still with you,” he promises quietly.

I don’t know how long it has been before the first voices start to ring out. Questions echoing. Anxious, more than angry. I see iunctii slowing, shaking their heads and looking around in confusion, as if waking from a dream. Soon the tunnel is filled not with the slow shuffling of feet, but the mutter of bemused conversation.

I stand again. Gaze out over the throng. Some are starting to gather around the base of our platform, though none are climbing the stairs. But we’re the natural centre of attention up here. I am going to have to explain what is happening, soon enough. What I have woken them all to do.

“Diago?”

My heart stops at the female voice cutting through the low hubbub, from off to my left below. I turn slowly. Disbelievingly. Scan the milling crowd.

I spot them. Rows back but pushing their way forward and through. Dark, curly hair and sun-kissed skin. The younger’s long hair tousled, wild in a way it never is. The older’s is the same, just the way I remember it.

Their deep brown eyes, mirrors of each other’s and my own, on me. I don’t move. Don’t breathe. I cannot speak.

And then I am scrambling down the stairs as fast as my broken legs will take me toward my mother and sister.

The confused crowd parts like water before my rushing and suddenly I’m there. Standing in front of them. It’s them.

There are tears on both their smiling cheeks.

I don’t ask about Father, or Cari, or how. I am holding them. Sobbing with them. Laughing with them. No explanations, no words at all except our names, repeated over and over again in incredulous joy. I forget about what I have just done, or what is surely to come. I forget about my legs. My pain. About the war. The last five years have dropped away and I am wrapped in the safety and unconditional love of their embrace, and it is enough.

It is enough.

When my tears clear enough to focus again, I see Eidhin has descended after me. He’s staring. At first I think it’s at Ysa, but then I realise his gaze is fixed behind, over my shoulder.

For the first time since the Iudicium, I see him smile.

And before I can turn, before I can process it, the familiar voice emerges from the murmurs behind. Wry, and quiet, and utterly perplexed.

“Hail, Vis.”
